---
title: Berlin Bound
date: 2018-09-17T15:10:00+01:00
location:
  locality: Brighton
  country-name: United Kingdom
summary: Ich bin ein Berliner?
tags:
- berlin
- germany
- europe
- travel
- personal
- freelancing
---
It occurred to me the other day that it’s been almost ten years since I [moved to the South Coast][1], briefly living in Littlehampton before settling in Brighton. This milestone coincides with thoughts to the future, and whether I want to remain in Brighton for the foreseeable, or look for my next adventure.

The year following my move south, I embarked on [a three-week train journey around Europe][2] and ever since I have looked for excuses to return. Indeed, a chief goal of going freelance was to find projects based in Europe; to not have accomplished this has been a growing source of frustration. As the clock inexorably ticks down to Brexit, my hand has been forced: it’s now or never.

So, with one eye towards a possible relocation, later this week I head to Berlin. During a two-week stay, I’ll be attending events and meeting people who will hopefully show me what the city can offer a hybrid designer/developer like me. Then, I’m off to Malmö for [Confront][3] conference, my eyes remaining open to opportunities that may lie elsewhere in Europe. Before returning home, I’ll spend a few days in Hamburg, crossing another German city off my list of places to visit.

Who knows if this venture will turn up anything interesting. I do know that I’ll have to be a little more open-minded, outgoing and pro-active than usual for this trip to be a success. But if nothing else, I’ll have ample opportunity to build up my score in Duolingo; I really enjoyed practising German when I was in the capital last year.

Anyway, if you’re in Berlin and would like to meet-up, please get in touch, either [here][4] or via [Twitter][5] or [Micro.blog][6]. I’m excited to see what opportunities I can uncover.

[1]: https://twitter.com/paulrobertlloyd/statuses/974822866
[2]: /2009/05/a_european_adventure
[3]: https://confront.se
[4]: /contact
[5]: https://twitter.com/paulrobertlloyd
[6]: https://micro.blog/paulrobertlloyd
